'Introducing Bloom Filters for Valkey' Blog (#229)
valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io: content/blog/2025-04-02-valkey-bloom.md

Author: Alternative file name: `2025-04-02-introducing_bloom_filters.md`

+++
title= "Introducing Bloom Filters for Valkey"
description = "Learn how to use bloom filters to perform large-scale membership testing with significant memory savings."
date= 2025-04-02 01:01:01
authors= [ "karthiksubbarao"]
+++

We are introducing Bloom Filters as a new data type in Valkey via [valkey-bloom](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-bloom/), an official Valkey Module which is compatible with Valkey versions >= 8.0. Bloom filters provide efficient, large-scale membership testing, improving performance and offering significant memory savings for high-volume applications.

> As an example, previously, Valkey users could use the `SET` data type for handling advertisement deduplication workloads. However, since every item in the set is allocated, the problem with this approach is high memory usage. This article demonstrates how using the bloom filter data type from valkey-bloom achieves >93% memory savings for the same workload, while exploring its implementation, technical details, and practical recommendations.

Author: Should we say ">93%" or "93% - 98%"?

Because with the default FP rate (one in every hundred), we have memory savings of 98%

Reviewer: I personally like >93% , leaving it open ended seems better

## Introduction

> Bloom filters are a space efficient probabilistic data structure that allows adding elements and checking whether elements exist. False positives are possible where a filter incorrectly indicates that an element exists, even though it was not added. However, Bloom Filters guarantee that false negatives (incorrectly indicating that an element does not exist, even though it was added) do not occur. Bloom Filters were first introduced in a paper from 1970 by Burton H. Bloom.

Reviewer: Would it be better to be consistent about the bracket use describing false positives and false negatives. Think it would make sense to remove the brackets for false negatives and both just be a part of the sentences

Author: Addressed

When checking whether an item exists on a scaled out bloom filter (`BF.EXISTS`/`BF.MEXISTS`), we look through each filter (from oldest to newest) in the sub filter vector and perform a check operation on each one. Similarly, to add a new item to the bloom filter, we check through all the filters to see if the item already exists and the item is added to the current filter if it does not exist.
Any default creation as a result of `BF.ADD`, `BF.MADD`, `BF.INSERT` will be a scalable bloom filter.

**Common Bloom filter properties**

Capacity - The number of unique items that can be added before a bloom filter scales out occurs (in case of scalable bloom filters) or before any command which inserts a new item is rejected (in case of non scalable bloom filters).

False Positive Rate (aka Error Rate) - The rate that controls the probability of bloom set/check operations being false positives. Example: 0.001 means 1 in every 1000 unique item adds/checks can be a false positive.

## Use cases / Memory Savings

> In this example, we are simulating a very common use case of bloom filters: Ad / Event Deduplication. Applications can utilize bloom filters to track whether an advertisement / event notification has already been shown to a customer and use this to prevent showing it again to the customer.

Reviewer 2: Should we get rid of mentioning the "event" ? I don't see it's being used further.

```
In this example, we are simulating a very common use case of bloom filters: advertisement view deduplication. Applications can utilize bloom filters to track whether an advertisement has already been shown to a customer and use this to prevent showing it again to the customer.
```

Without bloom filters, applications could use the `SET` Valkey data type such that they have a unique `SET` for every advertisement. Then, they can use the `SADD` command track every customer who has already seen this particular advertisement by adding them to the set. This means we have 500 sets, each with 5M members. This will require 152.57GB.

With bloom filters, applications can create a unique bloom filter for every advertisement with the `BF.RESERVE` or `BF.INSERT` command. Here, they can specify the exact capacity they require: 5M - which means 5M items can be added to the bloom filter. For every customer that the advertisement is shown to, the application can add the UUID of the customer onto the specific filter. So, we have 500 bloom filters, each with a capacity of 5M. This will require variable memory depending on the false positive rate. In all cases (even stricter false positive rates), we can see there is a significant memory optimization compared to using the `SET` data type.

<table width="100%" border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; border: 1px solid black" cellpadding="8">
<tr>
<th>Number of Bloom Filters</th>
<th>Capacity</th>

> <th>FP Rate</th>

Reviewer 2: Could we put `FP` in bracket where we introduce false positive ?

<img src="/assets/media/pictures/bloomfilter_memusage.png" style="width: 40%;" alt="SET vs Bloom Filter Memory Usage Comparison">
</div>

## Limits and recommendations

To ensure optimal server performance during serialization and deserialization of bloom filters, we have added a limit on their memory usage per object. The default memory usage limit of a bloom filter is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. However, the limit can be tuned using the configuration above.

The implication of the memory limit is that operations involving bloom filter creations or scaling out that result in a bloom filter with overall memory usage over the limit will be rejected. Example:
```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.ADD ad1_filter user1
(error) ERR operation exceeds bloom object memory limit
```
This poses an issue to users where their scalable bloom filters can reach the memory limit after some number of days of data population and it starts failing scale outs during the insertion of unique items.

> As a solution, to help users understand at what capacity their bloom filter will hit the memory limit, valkey-bloom has two options. This is useful to check beforehand to ensure that your bloom filter will not fail scale outs or creations later on as part of your workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a solution, to help users understand at what capacity their bloom filter will hit the memory limit, valkey-bloom has two options. These are useful to check beforehand to ensure that your bloom filter will not fail scale outs or creations later on as part of your workload.
```

Author: Addressed

```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INFO filter1 MAXSCALEDCAPACITY
(integer) 26214300
```

To get an idea of what the memory usage looks like for the max capacity of an individual non scaling filter, we have a table below. With a 128MB limit and default false positive rate, we can create a bloom filter with 112M as the capacity. With a 512MB limit, a bloom filter can hold 448M items.

<table width="100%" border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; border: 1px solid black" cellpadding="8">
<tr>
<th>Non Scaling Filter - Capacity</th>
<th>FP Rate</th>
<th>Memory Usage (MB)</th>
<th>Notes</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>112M</td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td>~128</td>
<td>Default FP Rate and Default Memory Limit</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>74M</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td>~128</td>
<td>Custom FP Rate and Default Memory Limit</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>448M</td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td>~512</td>
<td>Default FP Rate and Custom Memory Limit</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>298M</td>
<td>0.001</td>
<td>~512</td>
<td>Custom FP Rate and Custom Memory Limit</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Performance 

> The bloom commands which involve adding items or checking the existence of items have a time complexity of O(n * k) where n is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and k is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both `BF.ADD` and `BF.EXISTS` are both O(n) as they only operate on one item.

Reviewer 2: Let's put the constant in caps.
nit:

```suggestion
The bloom commands which involve adding items or checking the existence of items have a time complexity of O(N * K) where N is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and K is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both `BF.ADD` and `BF.EXISTS` are both O(N) as they only operate on one item.
```
